---
tags:
  - 2020/01/28
  - 2020/session
  - bills
cmte:
  - "[[House Health and Welfare]]"
---
[[House Health and Welfare]] – Chairman [[Fred Wood]]

H 340 – Sen. [[Mary Souza]]
[https://legislature.idaho.gov/wp-content/uploads/sessioninfo/2020/legislation/H0340.pdf](https://legislature.idaho.gov/wp-content/uploads/sessioninfo/2020/legislation/H0340.pdf)

“offers an exemption from licensing for residential programs offering temporary alcohol-drug treatment for those thirteen through seventeen years of age.” - child will not spend more than 4 months in the facility per year

Teen drug use that is on the rise dramatically, and our suicide rate is going up. Those that are under 18 can’t go to crisis centers or rehab programs. Three in the state at $10-12K per month.

Private agreement between parents and a private treatment program.

Primary problem is drug/alcohol abuse, not mental or behavioral issues

DHW amendment language, deleted all of the original bill (which passed Senate w/ no House hearing) and replaced with DHS language, plus 5 safety requirements.

Souza characterizes as “community supervision” between parents, doctors, law enforcement, school counselors

Inspired by successful _Good Samaritan_ program in N. Idaho

Rep. Mendive – member of a church that runs a drug-alcohol program, they requested parts of this bill

$3,000 for 4-month in-home treatment program, existing 50 man / 50 women facility

Track inpatients for 5 years -- 78% success rate staying off drugs/alcohol

Wagoner question: background checks, all employees/volunteers/staff? Interval?

Souza: Self-regulated, some criminal history expected w/ mentors, mainly looking for violence/predatory

Lickley: differences between treatment programs for adults & teens?

Good Samaritan had an adolescent program for about 10 years, about 5 years ago a grandparent was upset & found they didn’t have a license from the state and shut it down.

Religion/Jesus is seen as a successful element in the program, Pastor [[Tim Remington]] doesn’t want government licensing to get in the way of that.

Testimony

[[Ruth York]] –Executive Director of the [[Idaho Federation of Families]]

Spoken with families. Head of sheriffs’ association says they can investigate a crime but can’t shut down a center. Good Samaritan program is a good example of what bill would allow. 120-day program for women, men 60-day program. Women no kissing? No clinical basis for treatments. Examples of facilities in the country with only profit in mind. Religious organizations offering substance abuse treatments w/out clinical or medical oversight.

Jim Baugh – former disability something, now private citizen

Abuse/neglect under Title 16 vs. Abuse in a facility. Title 16 is all about families & is civil court. Abuse in facilities is handled under Title 18, criminal.

Licensing is important in discovering abuse & neglect, much more common to see these issues between residents rather than between staff & residents

Drug addicted children have serious medical risks during detox. Licensing scheme has levels according to medical severity. Medical opioid detox has risk of seizures, comas, death.

Background check happens but doesn’t have any enforcement or exclusions based on that. 

Pat Martelle – clinical social worker, mental health advocate, also works at Idaho Federation of Families.

Excited to hear about a bill providing another behavioral health solution. Have worked with a whole host of people to collaborate on children’s behavioral health… but where is this going?

New system under construction is intended to treat & get people out of the system, scientifically backed treatments. Evidence-based treatment has been established, need plans & assessment that match person’s needs. This bill removes requirement for developing plans and doing assessment.

_Various concerns without licensing._

Ben Chapel – person, addict, AA & rehab. Working with IFF.

Spoken word thing about drug experience. Sober for 3 years. Zealous Recovery. Rehab w/ cognitive and group therapy.

Rep. Chew—contemplating a scheme where facilities don’t need licenses? Ben: Faith has a place, but thinks it seems dangerous to have facilities that don’t have structures in place.

Christine Pisani—executive director of Idaho Council on Developmental Disabilities

Against Bill, appreciates effort by Souza and Mendive. Removing licensing scheme won’t ensure better treatments.

Linda Miller—parent, has a child that has attended a mental health residential facility & another that has been in juvenile detention/has issues with drugs

Concerned about unintended consequences. Intention of bill is don’t want to have children with mental health issues in these facilities, but no safeguards against that. Most youth with a substance abuse problem have also experienced trauma.

Going to state licensing board was a quick process for dealing with issues. Relying on a legislative panel would delay that process.

“I would choose _no_ facility for my son, rather than the experience he had.”

Finding placement was extremely stressful, yearlong process with multiple hospitalizations, case manager/support system was invaluable

Dr. Sheila Freidus—clinical psychologist from Meridian, specializing in trauma

Works with many families who have adopted ID foster kids. Trauma and substance abuse go hand in hand (70%). ID has highest rates of suicide, highest trauma ACE scores which mean highest risks of suicide and trauma/mental health. To say kids going into these facilities aren’t affected by other issues is naïve.

Kathy Garrett—NAMI Idaho

NAMI acknowledges Idaho has a lack of residential drug abuse treatment programs for youth. 340 is well intended but

More notes in flip pad